# Information effects in the Swedish electorate: Preliminary analysis (1998-2018)

What difference does knowledge make to political attitudes or political behaviors? One established way of quantifying such differences is through so-called information effects (Althaus 2003; Bartels 1996), i.e., estimated differences between actual patterns of attitudes or choices and the patterns we likely would see, had people been more (or fully) informed. The information effects literature makes clear that knowledge does matter for politics, and can in some cases even change the electoral outcome. For example, Ahlstrom-Vij and Allen (forthcoming) model an informed EU referendum in the UK, and sees the proportion of ‘Remain’ swing from a minority to a majority. Blais et al. (2009) simulate the outcome of six past Canadian elections, involving three to four parties, with fully informed voters, and see a likely difference in outcome in one. Oscarsson (2007) simulates six past Swedish elections, involving eight main parties, and sees a likely difference in outcome in two of them.  

Information effects modeling can also be used to look at the influence of knowledge on political opinion over time. For example, Ahlstrom-Vij (2021) uses ANES data to evaluate the idea that we have entered a “post-truth era”, by arguing that, if we have, we should expect to see decreasing information effects on central political issues over time. That is, we should expect to see knowledge making less of a difference to what we want or do in the political realm over time. This turns out to be the case: Ahlstrom-Vij shows that, at least in a US context, we see a decrease in information effects on party preferences as well as on key, political issues – immigration, same-sex adoption, and gun laws, in particular – in the period of 2004 to 2016. This offers some novel, empirical evidence for the “post-truth” narrative.  

The analysis contained in this repository is a first stab at an attempt to conduct a similar investigation into the Swedish electorate. In particular, have information effects in the Swedish electorate remained constant over time? If not, how have they changed over the years, and what does this tell us about the condition and implications of political knowledge in Sweden?